hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day this is Steve moulds
time you've seen him you've seen his
face when he did the chain what's it
what's the deal well it's called Emotiv
face is it honestly because yes some
scientists named at night I've always
wanted something named after it would be
something stupid if it was like the same
land so anyway long story short we are
in an argument and we were gonna settle
it with internet physics videos which is
the appropriate way to settle an
argument if you've never seen a nerd
fight they look just like this steve has
proposed the building of a spinny water
apparatus and he's telling me he thinks
the waters gonna sling out of it in a
certain direction now Steve seems like a
pretty smart guy if you can look past
the British accent and all that but I
just don't agree with him somewhere
along the argument we decide that it's
gonna take a phantom camera to figure
out exactly what's going to happen with
this device but at the end of discussion
I started to think that maybe Steve has
already built this thing and I'm just
getting played anyway this is how that
discussion ended we made an agreement
and what did you say about being an
Alabama
if you make a handshake in Alabama yeah
it's a contract all right we already did
this I'm on a train in London about to
go see Steve mole at the high-speed
camera I've been tricked
pretty sure whenever I visit someone
whose videos I watch on YouTube I'm
always really excited to see where they
film in real life okay so this is the
studio right it looks so much bigger on
YouTube everyone always says it looks
smaller but once we were in Steve's back
garden we set up the slow-motion camera
and finalized the terms of our
disagreement to state the question
simply if you spin it and then you take
a snapshot what does the snapshot look
like okay so so what what stress is a
your description was this you said that
the water would come out and then it
would kind of go like this and it would
be back here like that okay so we take a
snapshot and it looks like that well I
think that happens but I think it also
it also goes in the direction of
rotation okay this is a way to think
about it in two steps okay because if
the question is too complicated just
simplify it and then you might get there
okay so this the chants are just coming
out like this okay okay and so we're
gonna spin it this way
and then now maybe you have an intuitive
understanding of what's gonna happen
when you take a snapshot what do you
think so we have angular momentum
angular momentum there right yeah and so
I would think that as a particle comes
out here it has some side words velocity
that's that's a term right side words I
slide woods yeah yeah yeah yeah that's a
tangential well I'm just gonna say side
words I'm from Alabama so it's got some
side words direction huh and so I think
what's gonna happen is you're gonna see
a curve get thrown out like that okay so
you think it's spinning in this
direction the curve is gonna go like
that
yeah I think so okay am I wrong that's
like the opposite of most people's
intuition why because okay well most
people would say like it's gonna come
out here and it's gonna it's gonna trail
behind oh that mean most people's
situation I think it's a what should we
see what happens well let's do this then
what do you like this is the simpler
puzzle so let's destroy this say yeah
okay let me set the Phantom Oh am I
wrong I think so yeah you think I'm
wrong okay so here we go the first
question is what happens with just
straight water coming out and you think
what's gonna happen so I think that the
you're gonna get this curve of water the
trails the motion of the spouts but yeah
I think it's gonna trail the motion of
the spout but it could it still it still
has motion going in the direction of
rotation it does but I but he died he
does you try to make it look is what
you're doing I just can't get absolutely
soaking my feet okay I'm ready ready
ready yeah oh that's pretty
all right really pretty okay so let's
take a look at that slow motion and see
why Steve and I both agree and disagree
so yeah it's kind of it's it's trailing
the that's what I meant by chaining oh
here we go it goes it's it's behind the
direction of motion right okay yeah
granted granted but any individual
particle is actually going out in a way
yeah it's so I'm not wrong
so this is a language problem if you
look at it from the snapshot view you
could say it's trailing but I'm an
American and I think about what that
particle is seeing and experiencing on
its own and Steve's wrong and a British
sort of always right kind of way as
water exits the spout let's track anyone
droplet and try to draw what it does
there are two things happening here
number one it's being shot out of the
spout that gives it an initial velocity
in this direction number two it's being
slung around the wheel by rotation which
means when it exits the spout it also
has this velocity going in this
direction now that we have those two
components laid out if you add the
arrows together that gives you the final
direction of the water when it leaves
the pipe and if you'll notice it's not
actually trailing the pipe it's moving
in a straight line forward if you were
to draw a circle in your mind around any
drop that's on the screen right now and
follow it you'll see that it's moving in
a straight line forward from the
direction that it left the pipe it looks
like it's trailing but it's not that's
an optical illusion so we're now gonna
have the water jets flying into the
center you made this just just to get
onto me yes this was just to get onto
your YouTube channel so my guess is if
we if we follow the same logic that we
had before and we have the the the
rotational velocity Omega times the
radius R then that's going to make this
go in this direction but the water jet
is going to be coming up and at you like
this so I would expect a snapshot oh god
I see the problem now so so when we
start it it's gonna all go to the middle
but as you start to accelerate I think
it's going to the snapshot it's gonna
look like it's lagging behind and then
as we get faster and faster it's gonna
look like it's going forward okay that's
interesting
so it's something there's a certain
speed you think where speed of rotation
where it's going to come back
in the middle we're talking about the
snapshot yeah yeah I think that's
possible okay
yeah but what I like is and what most
people's intuition is you would expect
it to lag behind right why say it I
think it's gonna start lagging behind
first snapshot and then it'll speed back
okay well let's find out
okay go turn the water on are you clear
oh that's beautiful hang in the middle
nice almost it wants to we can tune it
right yeah oh that's pretty yeah
all right you ready yeah okay oh that's
pretty dude yeah it's cool
ah that's awesome
it feels weird yeah it looks it just
doesn't look right is it no it doesn't
look right at all okay I'm just gonna
try and go as fast as I can just my hand
you can go really slow does it lag at
all no as soon as you stop some weights
good as soon as you start to move it
goes food okay I was wrong but Steve was
right let's run the slow-mo
[Music]
okay what we're seeing here is
fascinating part of its obvious part of
its not so obvious you remember before
when we said you had two velocity
components right number one we have the
water that's shooting out of the spout
which gives it a velocity in this
direction and number two it's being
slung around by rotation which gives it
velocity in this direction just like
before let's add those arrows up and
again the water is still moving in a
straight line just like before you can
track any particle and follow it and
you'll see that it's moving in a
straight line away from the nozzle the
fun thing about this device for me is
that it's tricking my brain into
thinking that the water is actively
curving out in front but it's not your
brain tricks itself into thinking the
water is turning and here we are at the
smartereveryday moment for me personally
when I'm presented with a problem
oftentimes I get pretty headstrong like
maybe even arrogant because of my
education on the topic or because I have
a life experience that makes me think I
know all the answers and when that
happens in my heart I am less likely to
hear the other person at times during
this experiment Steve and I were
communicating the exact same physical
truths from two different perspectives
and because we weren't saying it exactly
the same way I misinterpreted that to
mean that one of us had to be wrong as I
look back at this footage it was obvious
to me that Steve clearly understood my
perspective but I can't say I took the
time to do the same for him because of
that when I was really wrong and he was
trying to explain it to me
I was already shut down I couldn't see
it I just looked like an idiot here's
the take away from me when I disagree
with someone or at least I think I
disagree with someone it is imperative
that I stop I listen and I don't move on
until I completely understand the other
person
perspective because it's possible you'll
find that you don't actually disagree it
it doesn't feel right it doesn't feel
right at all but it makes perfect sense
real quick this video is sponsored by
audible you can get any audio book of
your choosing plus two free audible
originals by going to
audible.com/smarter or texting the word
smarter to 500 500 speaking of
disagreements with the British I want to
try to convince you to listen to a book
I have discovered biographies I want to
direct your attention to this book it's
called the Mark II and it's about
Marquis de Lafayette it's written by
Laura or Rishi oh I think that's how you
say her name it's a fantastic look at a
Frenchman's activities during the
American Revolution and how those
unfolded and transformed into his role
in the French Revolution it is
fascinating stuff go get in the Marquis
Lafayette reconsidered by going to
audible.com/smarter or texting the word
smarter to five hundred five hundred
there's also tons of other titles you
can get there are audible originals
which are exclusively available on
audible I reclaim my time in the car by
listening to audiobooks okay let's go
back to Steve's garden and thank him for
building such a wonderful contraption he
makes incredible physics videos all
kinds of really neat stuff you need to
check out his channel you and tell
people a couple videos that you
recommend I wanted to explain
gravitational waves but I wanted to
build something to say this is what
gravitational waves are involves a lycra
sheet and a drill with wheels attached
so you see that like you nailed it on
that one I feel I got like as close as I
could get okay so I will leave links
over here so you can check out these
videos there in space you can't see them
out there in space so go check those out
and you're hoping to get to a million
subscribers that's the goal right that's
what I will just be real yeah that's why
I'd feel reprieve if I've got the you
know the gold play button alright that's
the goal let's just be real here let's
don't think it so anyway that's it go
check out Steve's channel he makes great
stuff I've watched your stuff for years
man I think this is really fun to be in
your in your back garden man thank you
very much
cool I appreciate it I'm Destin this is
Steve getting smarter every day
have a good one bye
you